life is short it's sticking away and
seems to pass by faster as we get older
despite of this many people waste their
lives on trivial things but there's an
antidote thinking about death not only
reminds us that we have a limited amount
of time to do the things we want to do
it also teaches us to accept a reality
of death itself and that it's all around
us in this video I explore the stoic
philosophy behind memento mori
this video is animated by the YouTube
channel be de design for more philosophy
videos like this you'll find a link to
BD design in the description now let's
dive in memento mori' is Latin for
remember thou art mortal on the famous
painting by Philippe de Champagne eeeh
from 1671 you see the three essentials
of memento mori' the hourglass stands
for the notion that life is ticking away
second after second the Rose stands for
the truth about vitality which is that
at some point we all decay the skull
represents death we are going to die and
not only us the people around us
including our loved ones as well this
means that today could be the last day
you walk the earth
you could leave life right now let that
determine what you do and say and think
wrote Marcus Aurelius in his meditations
so if you would die today what would you
do well some people would certainly go
on a hedonistic binge getting whatever
pleasure they can think of before they
die but if you lead your life according
to stoic principles that would not be a
preferred option rather you would
probably live your last hours as
virtuously as possible do you want to
show appreciation for your loved ones
tell them you love them do you have
unfinished business now is the time to
take care of that so
memento mori is a great antidote to one
of the nastiest habits of mankind
procrastination because procrastination
can only take place if we believe that
we have an abundance of time when we
take that belief away we face the
necessity of doing our task now because
tomorrow we might be dead now thinking
about death may evoke feelings of fear
and sorrow along with the motivation we
get to take care of our business this
isn't caused by death itself but by our
opinions about death
here is a quote by epictetus men are
disturbed not by things but by the
principles and notions which they form
concerning things
death for instance is not terrible else
would have appeared so to Socrates but
the terror consists in an ocean of death
that it is terrible and quote when we
stop fearing death and we see it as
nothing more than the insurmountable
consequence of life we can be
appreciative for the time that is given
to us and not squander it doing petty
things another dimension of memento mori
is preparation yes we will lose the
people we love and sometimes in the most
brutal ways just look at human history
or look at what's happening in the world
right now the world is full of death not
being affected by loss is of course
easier said than done
even though the Stoics proposed is ideal
most of us are still human and will have
to deal with grief when someone they
love dies now reminding ourselves of the
possibility that we can lose a loved one
as we speak
helps us to be less shocked when that
happens for most people I know losing
someone they love is excruciating
humans are often so attached to each
other that they cannot bear the loss but
if we are mindful of the truth of death
we can cultivate a healthier mindset
towards the possibility of loss instead
of clinging to a person wishing that we
will never get separated we can embrace
the reality that the day of separation
will come this doesn't mean that we
shouldn't grieve and mourn it means that
we were prepared all along we can be
more functional and helpful human beings
for the community when death occurs in
this case losing someone due to
mortality becomes more neutral here's
how Marcus Aurelius puts it don't look
down on death but welcome it it too is
one of the things required by nature
like youth and old age like growth and
maturity like a new set of teeth a beard
the first gray hair like sex and
pregnancy and childbirth like all the
other physical changes at each
stage of life or dissolution is no
different and quote what happens after
we die will we enter the eternal
nothingness that freezes of
sense-perception
emotional turmoil worry and rumination
and the enslavement of our bodies or
will we return to the flesh again for
another life in the realm of matter no
one knows for sure but what we do know
is that mortality is upon us when death
smiles at us no matter where we go is
there a better response than to smile
back thank you for watching